# LLM Monitoring for Romeo Supercalculator

## Sommaire
- [Context and requirements](#context-and-requirements)
- [How to use this project ?](#how-to-use-this-project-)
  - [1. Installation and .env](#1-installation-and-env)
  - [2. Models](#2-models)
  - [3. Setup & Server](#3-setup--server)
    - [Setup](#setup)
    - [Server](#server)
  - [4. Monitor your LLM](#4-monitor-your-llm)
- [What does the dashboard track ?](#what-does-the-dashboard-track-)
  - [1. Sources](#1-sources)
  - [2. GPU Data](#2-gpu-datas)
  - [3. Llama.cpp Data](#3-llamacpp-datas)
  - [4. vLLM Data](#4-vllm-datas)
- [Benchmarking](#benchmarking)
- [API](#api)
- [Credits](#credits)


## Context and requirements

This project is designed for researchers, students, and engineers working on LLMs who want an automated way to deploy inference servers and benchmark models on High-Performance Computing clusters without dealing with complex manual configurations.

### Requirements

The scripts and configurations are specifically optimized for the ROMEO Supercomputer environment.

Before starting, ensure you have :

- An active account on the ROMEO cluster
- SSH access to the login node
- A basic understanding of Slurm commands

## How to use this project ?

### 1. Installation and .env

Clone the repository to your local directory on the cluster:

    git clone https://github.com/gameking773/LLM_Monitoring.git
    cd LLM_Monitoring

The project uses a .env file to manage private paths and Slurm settings without hardcoding them.

Go into the cloned repo and create your environment file:

    cp .env.template .env

Edit .env with your specific credentials.

You need to make run.sh executable :

    chmod +x ./run.sh

### 2. Models

Enter the infos for your model in the .env file. Then run this command : 

    ./run.sh sbatch model_download

*Note : Llama.cpp only accepts .gguf model*

### 3. Setup & Server

#### Setup

Run the setup script. This will compile the engine for ARM/GPU (GH200) and additional tools.

    ./run.sh sbatch setup.sh [inference_engine]

*Note : Compilation can take a long time and the job will automatically stops after 1h30, don't hesitate to increase it.*

#### Server

To start the server:

    ./run.sh sbatch runServer.sh [inference_engine]

The server will start on the allocated node. 

To access the Llama web interface :

- Identify the node name where the job is running with squeue --me

- Create an SSH tunnel from your local machine to the node: ssh -L 8080:[node]:8080 [login]@romeo1.univ-reims.fr.

- Open http://localhost:8080 in your browser.

*On vLLM, there isn't any chat box, i advise you to use Opencode*


### 4. Monitor your LLM

To track your server's performance (VRAM usage, tokens/sec, etc.), launch the monitoring dashboard. It automatically detects your active Slurm job:

    python3 metrics.py


## What does the dashboard track ?

### 1. Sources

The dashboard uses multiple sources to track the server :

For the GPU, it uses the nvidia-smi command.

For Llama server, it uses the endpoints /metrics and /v1/models.

### 2. GPU Datas

*Name* : Model of the GPU.   

*GPU Temperature* : Temperature of the core of the GPU.   
*Memory Temperature* : Temperature of the memory chips.   
*GPU Thermal Slowdown* : Indicates if the GPU is currently reducing its speed due to overheating.   
*Consumption* : Current power consumption in Watts / The maximum power cap allowed before the GPU starts throttling.   
   
*GPU Kernel Usage* : Percentage of time one or more GPU kernels were active over the last sample period.   
*Memory Usage* : Percentage of time the memory controller was busy.   
*VRAM Usage* : Amount of  memory currently occupied / Total VRAM capacity of the GPU.   
   
*Graphical clock* : Current frequency of the graphics cores (MHz).   
*Memory clock* : Current frequency of the VRAM.   
   
### 3. Llama.cpp Datas

*Running* : Number of requests currently being handled.   
*Pending* : Number of requests queued/waiting because the server is at full capacity.   

*Prompt process time* : Speed of prompt processing in tokens per second.   
*Tokens processed* : Total number of prompt tokens processed since server start.   
*Predict process time* : Total time spent generating tokens.   
*Tokens Generated* : Total number of tokens generated by the model.  
*Tokens In/Out* : Tokens processed / Tokens Generated.   

*Number of Decode* : Cumulative count of decoding cycles performed.   
*Max Tokens Observed* : Maximum context window size.   
*Busy Slots Average* : Number of active slots during the last decode cycle.

### 4. vLLM Datas

*Running* : Number of requests currently being handled.   
*Pending* : Number of requests queued/waiting because the server is at full capacity.   

*Tokens Processed* : The total of prompt tokens that the engine has processed since startup.  
*Tokens Generated* : The total of output tokens generated by the model across all requests.  
*Tokens In/Out* : Tokens processed / Tokens Generated.   
*Total Iteration* : The total number of tokens processed across all engine steps.  

*Tokens Cached* : Number of prompt tokens currently stored in the prefix cache. High values indicate efficient reuse of system prompts or long contexts.  
*Tokens Recomputed* : Number of tokens that had to be recalculated because they were evicted from the cache or couldn't be found. Lower is better for performance.  
*KV Cache Usage* : The percentage of the allocated GPU memory currently occupied by active or cached sequences.  

*Time to 1st Token (TTFT)* : The time elapsed between a request arriving and the generation of its first token.  
*Inter-token Latency* : The  time spent between generating consecutive tokens.  
*Time per Out Token* : The average time taken to generate a single output token.  

*Estimated FLOPs* : The estimated total number of floating-point operations executed by the GPU.  
*Estimated Bytes Read* : Total estimated data read from the GPU VRAM to the computational cores.  
*Estimated Bytes Wrote*: Total estimated data written back to the GPU VRAM.  

## API

The Metrics API serves as a bridge between the heavy inference engines (vLLM or Llama.cpp) and external monitoring tools. Built with FastAPI, it runs as a background service within the Slurm job.
In order to use it, you need to connect in ssh to the 5000 port of the running node. You can use this command :

    ssh -L 5000:[node]:5000 [login]@romeo1.univ-reims.fr.

Then, you can access the endpoint on http://localhost:5000

## Benchmarking 

To simplify the benchmarking, I choose to use EleutherAI lm-evaluation-harness framework. It works by executing the dataset on the model via an OpenAI-compatible API which make it perfect to test on Llama.cpp and vLLM.  
For the moment, the loglikelihood isn't supported on OpenAi chat completion endpoint (which are used in this project). It should be implemented soon but for now, choose datasets whithout them.
To use the benchmark, you need to find a dataset supported by lm-eval and put it in the .env. 
Then execute this command to start the banchmarking :

    ./run.sh sbatch runBenchmark.sh

*Benchmarking a model can take several hours. The benchmarking script stops after 18h, feel free to increase this value if you need more*

## Credits

This work was performed with the assistance of the ROMEO Regional Computing Center


EleutherAI eval-harness :   

    @misc{eval-harness,
    author       = {Gao, Leo and Tow, Jonathan and Abbasi, Baber and Biderman, Stella and Black, Sid and DiPofi, Anthony and Foster, Charles and Golding, Laurence and Hsu, Jeffrey and Le Noac'h, Alain and Li, Haonan and McDonell, Kyle and Muennighoff, Niklas and Ociepa, Chris and Phang, Jason and Reynolds, Laria and Schoelkopf, Hailey and Skowron, Aviya and Sutawika, Lintang and Tang, Eric and Thite, Anish and Wang, Ben and Wang, Kevin and Zou, Andy},
    title        = {The Language Model Evaluation Harness},
    month        = 07,
    year         = 2024,
    publisher    = {Zenodo},
    version      = {v0.4.3},
    doi          = {10.5281/zenodo.12608602},
    url          = {https://zenodo.org/records/12608602}
    }